look at this this is a Scots pine tree
normally this species lives for 150
years exceptionally 300 but we think
that this tree might be 400 years old it
truly is a living monument it's a great
part of our heritage and it has a
haunting beauty its craggy bark here and
it's beautiful smoky blue foliage and if
this thing's more than 400 years old it
was living when there were wolves
howling in this forest but not only that
it's fundamentally important as the
primal building block in one of the UK's
most exciting and important ecosystems
the Caledonian forest what a thing look
at that honestly that's a tree
Scott spine has got a wide global
distribution it grows in Spain all the
way up through Europe right across the
top of Siberia but what was unique when
the ice retreated from the UK after the
last ice age is that it was the only
conifer growing here and in our peculiar
oceanic climate that gave birth to the
mythical great wood of Caledon the
Caledonian forest but boy did we abuse
this habitat as soon as the Vikings
arrived they started burning it down
things got much worse in the 16th and
17th century we ran out of wood in
England and in lowland Scotland and so
they came up here and started cutting
all of this down to fueled the
Industrial Revolution it's still got
worse between the wars we imported
Canadian lumbermen and they virtually
felled a Speyside and then perhaps
saddest of all between 1960 and 1990
when many of us were alive 50% of what
remained was cut down and destroyed what
remains
well what remains is 17 thousand
hectares 37 blocks of this unique
environment some as small as just a
hundred and fifty trees but they are
absolute jewels in our landscape and
they support a remarkable collection of
life
perhaps the most exciting bird that
lives in Caledonian forest is the
remarkable capercaillie what's their
link with the trees well quite simply
that they feed on the freshly growing
shoots at the tips of the branches
another specialist of the Caledonian
forced is the crested tit in the case of
this species it's not about finding its
food here but its nesting habitat you
see it needs standing dead Pines that
are well rotted so that it can excavate
its nesting burrow into those in fact
it's such a specialist of this woodland
that if you want to see a crested tit
you've got to come here to the
Caledonian forest they really are a bird
of this wonderful woodland
but those are the birds specialists what
about the mammals well you might think
of pine marten and Wildcat and certainly
they do occur here but they're not
dependent directly on the pine trees but
there is a species that is and of course
it's the red squirrel and they really
are a Scots pine cone specialist you see
they're lighter than greys and as a
consequence of that they can reach right
to the ends of the branches to nibble
these things off and then get the rich
rewards from the seeds that are inside
here the Condor enforced isn't just a
gathering of beautiful old trees it's a
complex Association of all of the
species that live here but they are
dependent upon those trees these craggy
old survivors showing such great courage
to make a last stand here so what are
the future well there are plenty of
problems this area was over stopped with
sheep for a long time which prevented
regeneration
these days though in many places too
many deer also they're not the fires
there used to be and fire was implicitly
important when it came to maintaining
these forests it burned away all with
the ground level so that the little
saplings could find their way up through
into the light but you know I'm very
optimistic because we understand these
processes and if we understand them then
we can manage them and look regeneration
is taking place perhaps these trees
these very trees are the Caledonian
forest of tomorrow
and long may it prosper